=head1 NAME

GoGameTools::Manual::Tags - Using tags

=head2 Tag design

Tag design should follow the Unix philosophy as well. A tag should be specific
and denote exactly one thing. It should be possible to flexibly combine tags to
semantically indicate more complex situations.

If a tag seems to have more than one good spot in the tree hierarchy, consider
splitting it into several tags, or making the tag more specific.

Consider how your tag will work with generated tags such as C<#bad_move>. For
example, C<#direction_of_attack> will work with C<#bad_move>, meaning the
opponent has made a mistake in the direction of attack and you have to refute
it. But something generic like C<#good_strategy> won't work with C<#bad_move>.

Don't use negative tags such as C<#saving_unimportant_stones> or
C<#being_attacked_without_compensation> (the Japanese term 'mochikomi') because
we don't want the student to play bad moves. Instead, turn them into a positive
tags such as C<#exploiting_opponent_running_with_junk_stones>.

=head2 Ladder-related directives

If there is a ladder involved, then whether a ladder-related move is good or
bad depends on the ladder. When the opponent plays a move that needs the ladder
although he does not have it, it is a bad move and you can teach the
refutation. If the ladder is good for you, you can play the same move and it is
a good move. So you can't just put C<{{ bad_move }}> or C<{{ good_move }}> on
such a node. Therefore there are two ladder-related directives that help the
problem generator to add appropriate C<{{ conditions }}> and C<{{ bad_move }}>
directives.

C<{{ needs_ladder }}> declares that this move depends on a ladder. The move
color determines which side needs the ladder.

C<{{ ladder_good_for W }}> declares that this variation and its whole subtree
assumes that the ladder is good for the given color.

C<{{ ladder_good_for }}> can be overridden in a descendant variation. Because
problem nodes are processed from the leaf to the root, only the deepest such
directive determines the ladder. This will become clearer with an example:

If a node with a black move has C<{{ ladder_good_for B }}> and its parent node
with a white move has C<{{ needs_ladder }}>, it means that the opponent has
played a move that needs the ladder although the ladder is bad for him. In that
case we can mark the parent node with C<{{ bad_move }}>. Also the black move
gets a C<{{ condition The ladder is good for Black. }}>

There might be a deeper variation that assumes that the ladder is good for
White after all. So when processing that particular problem tree, the C<{{
needs_ladder }}> move works and is not labelled as a bad move. That is why the
deepest - most specific - C<{{ ladder_good_for }}> directive wins.

If a node with a black move has C<{{ ladder_good_for W }}> and its parent node
with a white move has C<{{ needs_ladder }}>, we want to inform the user that he
can play the white move that requires the ladder. In that case the parent node,
as well as the child node, gets a C<{{ condition The ladder is good for White.
}}>

If we get a to a node that has C<{{ needs_ladder }}> but we don't know for whom
the ladder is good, meaning we haven't seen a C<{{ ladder_good_for }}>
directive yet, so it's an error.

You can't use C<{{ ladder_good_for }}> or C<{{ needs_ladder }}> together with
C<{{ condition }}>.

When a response depends on a ladder, you might be tempted to add a stone
somewhere on the other side of the board that makes or breaks the ladder. But
consider using the ladder-related directives to make the bounds smaller so it’s
easier to solve the problem on small mobile phone screens.

=head2 Variations that change objectives

An objective tag - a tag that C<does> the C<#objective> tag - denotes the
expected result if both sides don't make bad moves. The problems are designed
so that the student doesn't have to make a bad move. And if the opponent,
simulated by the computer, makes a bad move, the problem's objective may
change, but the student can't expect that; he should expect the opponent the
respond with the best moves. For example, in endgame problems with the
C<#encroaching> tag, the student can expect to capture some stones even if the
opponent responds well, but cannot expect to kill the group. But if the
opponent makes a mistake then the student can kill the group. It might turn
into a C<#killing_with_ko> problem, but that tag is not appropriate for the
original #encroaching problem. So in that case there should be two problems: one
C<#encroaching> problem where the student can indeed make a ko, but that is
incidental and not expected. And another problem, tagged with
C<#killing_with_ko> - but not C<#encroaching>; it is not an endgame problem
anymore -, that starts with the opponent's bad move and the student is asked to
kill with ko.

Here are some scenarios where the objective can change due to a bad move:

A C<#encroaching> problem could turn into a C<#killing> problem if the opponent
makes a mistake in stopping the raid.

A C<#encroaching> problem could also turn into a C<#living> problem if the
opponent makes a mistake and lets the raider live inside his territory.

A life-and-death problem where the attacker can expect to get a seki could turn
into a ko. A ko could turn into unconditional killing.

A C<#living> problem where one side can expect to live could turn into a
C<#killing> problem if that side makes a bad move and the opponent can expect
to kill. Similarly, a C<#killing> problem could turn into a C<#living> problem
when one side fails to make the correct killing move.

On which node should you put a tag?

Put an objective tag on the node where the expected result changes. A setup
node should therefore also have an objective tag.

Put a tactical tag - a tag that C<does> the C<#tactics> tag - on the node where
that tactic occurs.

In endgame problems, C<#capturing_race> means that it is about something bigger
than just nibbling off a few stones off the edge of a group. It's more like a
major break-in engineered via a capturing race because the opponent responded
in the wrong way.

=cut
